>> Hi, it's James here
from "Food Matters,"
and I wanted to introduce this
special interview that I have
with Douglas Doman.
Douglas is the son
of Glenn Doman,
and Glenn is the founder of The
Institutes for the Achievement
of Human Potential.
This is a fantastic
organization in the US
that helps children
in particular
who are brain-injured
redevelop function in the body.
And it's breaking research
that they're doing there
around food, nutrition,
cognitive exercises in order
to be able to rewire the
brain, and really acknowledges
this idea of neuroplasticity,
that you can learn and grow
at any stage of life regardless
of whether you have any brain
injury, whether it's
cerebral palsy, or autism,
or if you're on the spectrum,
or if you have dementia
or Alzheimer's, even
if you're older,
at any point of
your life, you have
the capability and
the opportunity,
leveraging this concept
of neuroplasticity,
to improve cognitive function,
to improve brain function,
even if you suffer from
a bit of memory loss.
Make sure to check
this interview out.
It's fantastic.
And especially if you have
kids, this is super important.
[LIGHT MUSIC]
>> When I was two, my father
sold his house and bought
the campus of The Institutes
for the Achievement of Human
Potential.
His house was a small
part of a large donation
to actually purchase the campus.
And when The
Institutes started, he
was just working around
the clock nonstop.
And my mother was
the head nurse.
And she was working
around the clock nonstop.
So my brother and my sister--
and this was a
surprise for them,
because they had been used
to having their parents
all the time--
I was put off with a nanny.
But actually, to have
my own full-time adult
to do what I wanted, and
play, and do everything
was just a wonderful
life for me.
And my father, to
make up for the fact
that he was working so
hard, permitted the children
to be with him whenever
he was working anywhere.
And so we would
sit-in with him when
he was seeing the parents
of brain-injured children.
And he had a very strict rule.
And the rule was, you're welcome
to sit with me in the office,
be a part of this whole process,
but if we became a distraction,
he would say, don't go
away mad, just go away.
And of course, I
would go away mad.
[CHUCKLES]
But when he had wonderful
people coming into the home--
medical doctors who understood
our work, scientists
who understood our work--
we were always
invited to be there.
And so we just grew up
seeing and understanding
what was going on
with The Institutes.
And so we lived there.
It was a part of our work.
[LIGHT MUSIC]
A huge part of the problem
of what the world calls
special needs children
is that the diagnosis
is absolutely chaotic.
And so there are children
who have cerebral palsy.
There are children who
are called autistic.
There are children
who are Down syndrome.
who are epileptic.
There are children that
have learning problems.
There are children
who are hyperactive.
And then there is the whole
host of ADHD and all the letters
that they've created.
And The Institutes'
now in our 61st year.
We have seen these
diseases get created.
And they have just
created more chaos
from the standpoint of parents
who, when they find out
they have this kind
of a child, whatever
label you want to put them in,
they're desperate to find out
what to do.
And the problem in the world
of conventional therapy
is each of those diseases--
cerebral palsy, autism,
epilepsy-- they all have
their own treatments.
And all of the treatments
are based on the symptoms.
And so it's
well-known by science,
as it has been known for
decades or centuries,
that you cannot treat the
symptom and make the cause
or the disease go away.
This is why physical therapy,
occupational therapy,
speech therapy, drug
therapy, they cannot work.
They will not work because
they're attempting to treat
the symptoms, and
it cannot be done.
So all the founding
members of The Institutes,
including my father, who
is a physical therapist,
had used conventional
therapy with all
of their hearts
and all their might
and found that it
wasn't effective.
And they realized
that if they were
going to fulfill their
goal, their objective--
and the objective of The
Institutes from its founding
was for brain-injured children
to become completely well.
And the staff had
never seen or heard
of a brain-injured child
who had ever gotten well.
So having to treat the brain,
the problem is brain injury.
And all those children that
I just mentioned to you
are all brain-injured.
They all have
neurological problems.
And yet parents are
distracted and think,
oh, no, my child is
not brain-injured.
My child has cerebral palsy.
We can even go into the
creation of those names,
because we've seen it happen.
It's been fascinating and
horrifying at the same time,
because every year now,
there continue to be
new names and new diagnoses.
Now that the genetic tests
have proceeded and are
so much better now, and they're
discovering new genetic issues,
and each one gets its own name.
Smith syndrome,
or Jones syndrome.
This horrifies the
parents because there
are only 28 kids with Smith
syndrome in the world.
This is what parents tell us.
Their child is one.
And of course, it means
if there are only 28,
that nobody knows
anything about them.
But we were seeing children
with Smith syndrome
20 years ago, 40 years ago,
before the genetic issue
was understood.
And of course, we were getting
results with them as well.
So now, we have seen
children with every kind
of genetic issue that has
a neurological component,
and where the actual
issue is not progressive.
It's a static brain
injury that has occurred.
[LIGHT MUSIC]
We see the entire spectrum
of brain-injured children,
from those children
who are mild,
where their only problem is
they're reading two or three
years below age level.
And of course, these children
are considered stupid.
They're not stupid.
They have a
neurological problem.
It can be resolved,
and they can then
go to the head of
their class or beyond.
They have that potential.
And then on the other
end of the spectrum,
we see children who have been
in a coma, which is the most
severe form of brain injury.
So if you're asking what is the
bulk of how children get hurt,
yes, it's usually
through the process
of being born, either before
birth or during birth,
that there is some sort of
trauma in the actual birth
itself.
[LIGHT MUSIC]
My particular area of expertise
is in terms of mobility.
And brain-injured children--
typically what the world would
call cerebral palsy--
these children have huge
issues in terms of mobility.
They can come to us immobile.
Perhaps they're able to crawl
a little bit on their bellies,
maybe on their hands and knees
creeping, or walking and doing
so poorly.
So with these children, there
are a whole series of programs.
First of all, the
nutritional programs
are necessary to
give the children
the energy they need to get
our intensive treatment done.
So that's an
important component.
And of course, respiration,
particularly for chil-- well,
we've found that virtually all
brain-injured children suffer
from a chronic lack of
oxygenation of the brain,
and oxygen being the
principal food of the brain.
If there is that situation,
then all brain functions
are going to suffer.
So we put a huge amount
of time and effort
into the development of
respiratory programs, programs
that better oxygenate the brain.
And those programs are necessary
for our physical programs,
but also for
intellectual programs,
and to promote health.
We have a health victory.
And for a brain-injured child
to have a health victory,
he or she has to
have had 12 months
of consecutive perfect health.
No influenza, no temperature, no
cold, no sniffles, no nothing.
And these are often children
who may have been hospitalized
four or five times a year due
to their medical problems,
and now, 12 months
perfect health.
And these are two- or
three-year-olds in some cases.
Well, even average normal
two- or three-year-olds
can't get away with
that kind of health,
but with brain-injured
children, it can happen.
So there's a
respiratory component.
Of course, there are
areas of the brain that
are responsible for balance.
So we have programs for
balanced development.
There are programs to
develop coordination,
another necessary component
of mobility development.
So our objective is to get
an immobile child crawling
on his belly following
the same normal pathway
that the average baby follows.
All we're doing is
recreating normal development
with our brain-injured children.
So the children learn to
crawl on their bellies
to the point
they're crawling all
over the house as a
means of transportation.
Then we give them a
balanced development program
so they can push up onto
the third dimension,
begin to creep on
their hands and knees.
They do hundreds of
meters of that a day.
And then there's the process
of learning how to walk
and becoming
independent walkers,
and we have a series of programs
for independent walking.
And then finally, running,
hopping, skipping, and jumping,
and then on to gymnastics,
biking, swimming.
And that's when
we're moving them
into physical excellence,
which is our objective
for every brain-injured child.
Not to be just average, but
to be physically excellent.
[LIGHT MUSIC]
Well, brain-injured children,
as a symptom of their brain
injury, are much more
sensitive to certain foods
than average people.
So their ability to have
issues in terms of allergy
is enormous compared to
the average population.
So our program, of
course, is dairy-free.
It's gluten-free.
There are a whole series
of different foods
that are eliminated.
And then, with a
rotational diet,
once the child is desensitized
to that particular kind
of food, like
citrus, then we will
begin to rotate in citrus
maybe one or two days
a week so that they can
have that in their diet,
but not keep having
it day in and day out.
And with brain-injured
children, it
becomes more
difficult and complex,
particularly the children
that the world calls autistic.
Now, of course, we disagree
with all of these terms,
and children who
are autistic are
injured in the posterior areas
of the midbrain and the cortex.
And these children often
have very limited diets
that they have created
for themselves.
They simply won't
eat other foods,
making it difficult
for their parents.
So we have to move beyond
that, because having
the same foods
all the time, they
become very sensitive
to those foods,
and then we need to give them
a much broader range of foods
that they can eat.
So in the end, once the parents
have worked this out and we
have a diet that is tailor-made
for each child in terms of his
food, his vitamin supplements--
this is all done with
the medical staff.
And the work is very advanced
in that all of the children
receive very
sophisticated blood tests.
And looking at
these blood tests--
and we have our own database
where the information about
each child is put in--
that information
then can determine
how we can tailor-make
that nutritional program
to make sure that all
the elements in the blood
are at optimum levels
that they should be,
or that the things
that shouldn't be there
should be at minimum levels.
We've now expanded this into a
nutrigenetic test with research
that we're doing with
Penn State University.
So now, Penn State has made
available very expensive tests
for our children at
a very minimal price.
And so now, our
medical staff can
look at the genetic
situation of the child,
look at it together with the
child's digestive situation,
and then tailor-make
that nutritional program
even with the genes in mind.
So this is really
pioneering work.
And it's ironic that
our relationship
began with our mutual friendship
with Novak and Jelena Djokovic,
because here he is.
He is also having
his blood looked at
in order to help him to
create the ideal diet so he
can compete at optimum levels.
And I haven't talked to him,
but I wouldn't be surprised
if he's also doing that from
a genetic standpoint as well.
So here we see top
flight athletes basically
having the same kind
of nutritional program
that brain-injured
children need in order
to have the best
chance of getting well.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, in The
Institute's history,
this goes back to
the early 1960s,
when my father
wrote the book "How
to Teach Your Baby to Read."
So in the early 1960s, for
those children in particular
who were called cervical
palsy, who are often considered
because of the way they
look to be unintelligent,
when in fact, like all
brain-injured children,
they have incredible
potential from
an intellectual standpoint.
So my father taught
their parents--
and my mother also, an
Institute staff member--
how to teach their
children to read.
So by the early
1960s, we had hundreds
of severely
brain-injured children
who were three years
of age who were reading
like eight- or nine-year-old
average children way
above age level.
So he wrote the book "How
to Teach Your Baby to Read"
so that we could
share this program
with the parents of
well babies, and that
began what we call
the gentle revolution.
And the gentle revolution
is the gentle revolution
of well babies having
the opportunity
to achieve physical,
intellectual, social,
and physiological excellence.
So yes, there is two aspects
of our work, one totally
related to the special
needs children,
and then the other
for well babies.
Because basically,
from birth to age six,
it is during these six
years that the brain
grows explosively, when the
child has by far the best
ability to take in
huge amounts of data
without any effort whatsoever.
And these years are being
wasted because children
don't go to school
until age six,
when basically, brain growth and
development at that explosive
time has stopped.
So our program is
basically birth to age six.
[LIGHT MUSIC]
And we have heard this kind of
question over and over again.
And the people who
have not read the books
in the "Gentle
Revolution" series--
"How to Teach Your
Baby Math," "How
to Multiply Your
Baby's Intelligence,"
our physical book, "Fit
Baby, Smart Baby, Your Baby,"
"How to Teach Your Baby to
Swim," all of these books
say that it's
absolutely necessary
that the child is never pushed.
If the child is being
pushed, the parents
are making a mistake.
And if you push the
child, the chances
are good that the child
is going to hate whatever
it is you're trying to push.
I had years of that
in private school.
[CHUCKLES] And some
of us have experienced
that in all of our own
educational experience.
So there can be no pushing.
And remember, we're
talking about birth
to six years of age.
So it has to be totally fun
from the child's standpoint.
Otherwise, the child
simply won't engage.
And there is now the
science to indicate
that if we human beings, adults,
and children, that if we are
relaxed, and we are happy,
and we don't feel threatened,
and we believe that
this is a joyful thing,
we will learn much more easily.
And that's basically a
hallmark of our program.
So if you look at
something like reading,
reading is considered a subject
in school, like geography,
or mathematics.
Reading is not a subject.
It is a neurological function.
It is a function of the
brain, and a unique one,
and one of the highest functions
that we human beings have.
So our program is about
giving the children a joy
of learning-- our hurt kids
as well as our well kids--
and then making sure that
throughout their lives,
they never lose that
childlike love of learning
that they have.
So anything that gets in the way
of that happening is verboten.
And in our early
development program--
which is from birth to five--
and then our
international school,
which is our demonstration
school in Philadelphia, which
goes from five to
age 14, the children
are always encouraged
to be self-determined
in terms of their education.
I had the pleasure for 20 years
to teach the children history,
a usual pretty dry subject
that a lot of people
hate to have to go
through in school.
So in my history course,
the children were asked,
what would you like to choose?
What would you like to
read about in history?
And so they came up with all
kinds of incredible things
that blew my mind.
A 12-year-old girl studying
whether Queen Elizabeth I
was a virgin or not.
[CHUCKLES] And here, they go
into the research into that,
and I'm reading
it along with them
and enjoying it as their joy.
And then in the end, it's
up to them as a historian,
because what the
purpose of my course
was not to study history, but to
be a historian, in the same way
that our children
don't study violin.
The purpose is for
them to be a violinist.
Or to be a swimmer, or
a runner, or a gymnast,
or a biker, whatever
the children
wish to do from a
physical standpoint.
[LIGHT MUSIC]
Well, it's well
beyond a philosophy.
It's an established
scientific fact.
We have been
teaching the parents
of brain-injured
children and well babies
for more than 50 years that
the brain grows by use.
And our parents can tell
you that from as much as 50
years ago.
Well, in the last 10
years, in the world
of neuroscience, the big
exciting thing that's
happening in neuroscience
and all the research that
proves this, the big
word is neuroplasticity.
Neuroplasticity.
Well, may I please translate?
Neuroplasticity means
the brain grows by use.
Now, in all the research and
things that you read about it--
and now there are
plenty of research
to indicate that children
have a wonderful capacity
in this regard.
But often, it ends up--
well, now that we
know this, we need
to learn how we can actually
use that neuroplasticity.
Well, we've been
doing it for 50 years.
We've been teaching the parents
of brain-injured children
to use that neuroplasticity
to teach them
how to walk, talk, hop, skip,
and jump, read, and write.
And the same thing in
terms of well babies.
Our parents are
actually doing it.
They're making it happen.
Now, an even newer word--
also exciting in
neuroscience-- is neurogenesis.
And this has a long
and sad history,
because if you go back to the
great universities like Harvard
and Yale, we have generations
of medical doctors
that were taught that when a
brain cell is dead, it is dead.
There is nothing
you can do about it.
And this, of course, has
laid the foundation why
brain-injured children
cannot succeed.
Why they cannot be made well is
because medical doctors believe
that--
well, they don't understand
about neuroplasticity.
They don't know
about neurogenesis.
And you read the medical texts.
When a brain cell
is dead, it is dead.
Nothing can be done.
Well, now it has been
proven by neurophysiologists
that neurogenesis
occurs in human beings.
So in children, in you and I,
in 80-year-olds, new brain cells
are popping into place.
Now, those brain cells will
die unless we use them.
The brain grows by use.
So some of the
neurophysiologists
that have come and lectured
to us at the institutes
have said that now, the
most important things that
have been learned about
keeping those cells alive
and making them go to
work is number one,
they have to be
well-fed, meaning
they need to be oxygenated.
So our physical program,
our aerobic program,
our oxygen enrichment
programs are
essential to make that happen.
There is a mobility
component to it.
You need to be mobile.
Well, that's what we do.
We get our children crawling,
creeping, walking, running,
and jumping.
And you have to
challenge the brain
to be doing something new.
Well, for a child who
crawls on his belly,
the new thing is he's got
to get up on his hands
and knees and creep.
For the child who walks, now
he needs to learn to run.
So you have to
challenge the brain.
So for you and I
to use those cells,
we need to learn
Chinese, or learn
to play the piano, or
some new challenging act.
So we have neuroplasticity,
the brain grows by use,
and neurogenesis.
Now, the reason
our program works
is not based solely
on neurogenesis,
but there are many
things that go
on in terms of brain growth and
development beyond just that.
[LIGHT MUSIC]
Well, in that world of cerebral
palsy, which of course,
for those of us
who are responsible
for mobility development,
these children
can be among the
most challenging.
A young Italian
boy who came to us
immobile, both parents
medical doctors,
and very tight, rigid body.
And of course, this is circa
The Institute's program
30 years ago, which is
not in the same league
with The Institute's
program today
because it's constantly
evolving as we
develop new and better methods.
So this family,
whereas a baby learns
to crawl in a matter of
months, years before he
was able to crawl.
And a baby in
seven months of age
is creeping on his hands
and knees, years for him
to creep on his hands
and knees, and then years
learning how to walk.
And [ITALIAN] then ended up--
he had never gone to
school a day in his life.
His parents had coached him all
the way through this process.
And when he went to take
the examinations to go
to university in
Italy, he scored
in the top 99% of
all Italian children,
then went to university, and
is now an assistant professor
of mathematics.
So he wrote an article which
he sent to one of our staff
who has a Harvard PhD in
mathematics, and he's our dean.
And this article written by our
brain-injured child, the math
professor, our math professor
said it was way above his head.
[CHUCKLES]
So there is an example.
Also in Italy, I'm the president
of our institutes in Europe,
so a lot of my time
has been spent there.
But a Down syndrome child,
Francesco Aleo, and his parents
came, again, 30 years ago.
And he was one.
They did a wonderful program.
By the time he was five, they
said he was ready to graduate.
We said, no.
We're more conservative
than our parents sometimes.
So he never graduated
from our program,
but he went on to
elementary school.
He went on to middle
school, high school,
went on to university, and
then got his master's degree
in economics.
And we had never heard of a
Down syndrome person reaching
such a high level academically,
particularly economics,
until one of our girls in
Brazil got her master's degree.
So Francesco, his
parents wrote a book
about the process of doing
the program with him.
And he's a wonderful,
wonderful young man.
[LIGHT MUSIC]
Over the last 50 years, we have
seen hundreds if not thousands
of these children.
And they are evaluated
neurologically
just like all the
children that we see.
And when we see them young, one
year of age, two years of age,
we find them to have an
injury in the midbrain.
And the midbrain has
large responsibilities
in terms of mobility, language,
and manual competence.
And so from the
world's standpoint,
language, manual competence are
particular areas of difficulty
with Down syndrome children.
And then we get into the
horrendous history of the names
that children have been given.
And as you know, I'm sure,
if you go back 75 years ago,
these children--
the medical diagnosis, the
standard medical diagnosis
is that these children
were Mongoloid idiots.
And this is part of the
horrendous history of the names
that are put on
brain-injured children.
If you go back to
that same time,
there were three standard
diagnoses for brain-injured
children--
idiot, imbecile, and moron.
So parents were told,
your child is an idiot.
Well, parents knew
that their child
wasn't an idiot in their hearts,
and so they objected to that.
And it took a long time for
the professionals to catch on.
Well, we can't be
calling children idiots,
or imbeciles, or
morons, so let's call
them mentally retarded.
So the name mentally
retarded, 60 or so years ago,
replaced those other names.
And of course, that's
an offensive term.
We've been fighting a battle
against that for years.
Now it's considered
politically incorrect.
But it was scientifically
correct, 60 years ago,
when the name was foolishly
made in the first place.
So these children,
like all babies,
have incredible potential
from a physical, intellectual,
and social standpoint.
And when we get them
young, we can prevent them
from having a cortical injury.
Now, the cortex is the
highest level of the brain.
It's responsible for human
intelligence, the ability
to read, to understand language,
and of course, to speak,
and to be able to write as well.
When we get children when they
are 6, 8, 10 years of age,
they will often have
a cortical injury.
And the reason is they
haven't been taught properly.
And their abilities and their
potential intellectually
has been ignored,
so they have been
considered not
capable of learning,
so not taught properly.
And then they begin to
fall behind their peers,
and then we see that
cortical injury.
So now, we have had
hundreds of children
where we've resolved their
cortical problems even
at 9, 10, 12, 15 years of age.
But it requires more work
to be able to do that.
When we get the children
young as babies,
we simply prevent the cortical
problem from ever happening.
I just came back from
our institutes in Europe,
and a four-year-old
Down syndrome girl
who had started the
program as a baby
was reading like
an eight-year-old,
running a mile non-stop.
Average children cannot
run a mile non-stop.
She was starting
to brachiate, which
is going hand over hand an
overhead ladder with your feet
off the ground.
And she was speaking two
languages with good quality.
And she was absolutely
charming too,
and incredibly well-behaved.
So this is the kind of potential
that these children have.
[LIGHT MUSIC]
The dream would be
to get rid of all
of those names that are
used, because they're
a distraction for parents.
It creates chaos and
smoke for parents.
And if it's not bad enough,
professionals as well,
because they believe the
cerebral palsy, autistic, et
cetera.
So to get rid of
all of those names,
understand that these
children and adults are all
brain-injured, and that it's
not the end of the world being
brain-injured.
The fact of the matter is we're
all brain-injured in some way.
And by the way, even if we
go to the genetic issues--
I know nothing about
genetics, but I
would be prepared
to make a guess
that as the genetic tests get
better and better, that five
years from now, maybe
10 years from now,
it'll be found that
all of us are not
perfect from a
genetic standpoint.
And the second thing,
of course, would
be to have all of the
treatment relating
to brain-injured children
to be based on brain growth
and development, and
no treatment related
to the symptoms whatsoever.
In the world of well
babies, it would
be that their
potential is respected,
and that love of learning
is never squashed,
and that they can be
taught early in life when
it's easy for them to learn.
And I will leave
this to another time,
but I know you feel
passionately about learning
foreign languages.
We do too.
And kids have an
incredible capacity
to learn foreign languages.
And imagine each culture
that opens up to them
as they're able to do that.
I have been the president of The
Institutes in Italy for years,
and so I had to learn Italian
to be able to do that.
But my understanding
of the Italian culture
and Italian people, I
couldn't have it the way
I do if I didn't have that
language as a part of it.
[LIGHT MUSIC]